review suggestions for PR-557 (RBAC) (#571)
clerk/clerk-docs: docs/guides/basic-rbac.mdx

---
title: Implement basic Role Based Access Control with metadata
description: Learn how to leverage Clerk's publicMetadata to implement your own basic Role Based Access Controls.
---

# Implement basic Role Based Access Control (RBAC) with metadata 

> To control which users can access certain parts of your application, you can leverage Clerk's [roles](/docs/organizations/roles-permissions#roles) feature. Although Clerk offers roles as part of the feature set for [organizations](/docs/organizations/overview), enabling organizations is *not* required to use roles. This guide will cover setting up a basic Role Based Access Control (RBAC) system for products that don't need organizations.

Author: this can be re-written if it's not very accurate or clear, I kind of wrote this off the top of my head. but the guide definitely needs an explanation to why a user would need to build an RBAC (in order to control which users access certain parts of their app, using Clerk's roles and publicMetadata features)

Reviewer: "Although Clerk offers roles as part of the feature set for [organizations](/docs/organizations/overview), enabling organizations is *not* required to use roles."

I think this is a little confusing 'There are roles in orgs...but you don't need orgs for roles.' I get what you mean, but I think clarifying 'virtual' roles as covered in this guide and the roles from Orgs a little more clearly would be perfect.

Reviewer 2: I think this is confusing as well. We have a feature called "roles," which this technique doesn't share. Something like : "Although Clerk offers a roles feature as part of [organizations](/docs/organizations/overview), not every app implements organizations. This guide will cover a workaround for setting up a basic Role Based Access Control (RBAC) system for products that don't use Clerk's organizations or roles."

This guide assumes that you are using Next.js App Router. The concepts here can be adapted to Next.js Pages Router and Remix.

## Configure the session token

> Clerk provides [user metadata](/docs/users/metadata#user-metadata), which is a tool that can be leveraged to build flexible custom logic into your application. `unsafeMetadata` can be read and updated in the browser, and as the name states, it is unsafe to store data in. `privateMetadata` can not be read in the browser. `publicMetadata` can be read by the browser and can only be updated server-side or in the Clerk Dashboard, making it the safest and best choice for this use case.

Author: We could even expand on the *why* of why we need the metadata. something like:

```suggestion
Clerk provides [user metadata](/docs/users/metadata#user-metadata), which is a tool that can be leveraged to build flexible custom logic into your application. Metadata can be used to store information, and in this case, it can be used to store a user's role.

`unsafeMetadata` can be read and updated in the browser, and as the name states, it is unsafe to store data in. `privateMetadata` can not be read in the browser. `publicMetadata` can be read by the browser and can only be updated server-side or in the Clerk Dashboard, making it the safest and best choice for this use case.
```

> To begin building a basic RBAC system, you need to make `publicMetadata` available to applications directly from the session token. This will make the token more convenient to work with and will reduce the need for additional network requests to load the data. 

Author: What do you think about this update?

```suggestion
To begin building a basic RBAC system, you need to make `publicMetadata` available to the application directly from the session token. By attaching the `publicMetadata` directly to the user's session, a fetch and network request isn't needed for every time you need to access the data.
```

Reviewer: I don't mind the latest suggestion. I would like to keep the info about `publicMetadata` being available in the browser but only update-able server-side. Its a common questions when talking about this stuff.

Reviewer: Looks good.

Reviewer 2: I'm going to go full International Tone:

```suggestion
To build a basic RBAC system, first you need to make `publicMetadata` available to the application directly from the session token. With `publicMetadata` attached directly to the user's session, a fetch and network request isn't required every time you need to access the data.
```

}
```

This `checkRole()` helper will accept a role using the `Roles` type and will return `true` if the user has that role, or `false` if the user does not.

Next, the admin dashboard can be refactored to use the `checkRole()` helper. Navigate back to the admin dashboard file. In the `if()` statement, remove the check that was used previously and replace it with the new `checkRole()` helper with `"admin"` as the argument.

```tsx filename="app/admin/dashboard/page.tsx" {2, 6-9}
import { redirect } from "next/navigation";
import { checkRole } from "@/utils/roles";

export default function AdminDashboard() {

  // If the user does not have the admin role, redirect them to the home page
  if (!checkRole("admin")) {
    redirect("/");
  }

  return (
    <>
      <h1>This is the admin dashboard</h1>
      <p>This page is restricted to users with the 'admin' role.</p>
    </>
  );
}
```

<Callout type="info">
  You can modify the behavior of the helper function to meet your needs. Maybe it will return the roles that the user has, or you could create a `protectByRole()` and have that function handle the redirect.
</Callout>

## Add admin tools to find users and add roles

> You can leverage the `checkRole()` function you added along with server actions to build basic tools for finding users and adding roles.

Author: ```suggestion
You can leverage the `checkRole()` function you added along with server actions to build basic tools for finding users and managing roles.
```
